---
inFeed: false
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: Background history of Tortured Earth
datePublished: '2016-02-08T21:56:46.084Z'
dateModified: '2016-02-08T21:56:37.770Z'
title: The Beginning
author: []
sourcePath: _posts/2016-02-08-342865ff-67c5-4efe-bd77-415d2615a6d5.md
published: true
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
url: 342865ff-67c5-4efe-bd77-415d2615a6d5/index.html
_type: Blurb

---
The Beginning

April 2012

Artice and I met at the camp for an afternoon of gaming. At the end of the session, and a few beers later, we started talking about what we liked and disliked about RPGs on the market. 

The main fantasy games on the market relied heavily upon classes. Not a bad notion and widely accepted, classes create a mold to which the character must conform. Science fiction games utilized combat systems which became increasingly complex as weapons increased in technology. Horror games adapted to a wider range of weapons, but introduced complex systems to deal with the concept of fear - which the game depended upon. 

We debated and tossed around ideas for several hours. At some point in the early morning, Artice said, "You realize what we're doing, don't you?"

I had no idea what he was implying. "No. What?"

"We're creating a game," the grin he gave me has lasted for four years running.

So we started. The first draft fused all the components of other games which satisfied our wishlist. The pilot test was horrible. The entire thing was scrapped and discussions began as to how we could accomplish our goals. 

First thing to go was the notion of classes. We replaced it with a 'real gaming' concept. The basics condense to this: as a real person, the person reading this has a skill set that is not bound by a profession or lifestyle. A doctor is equally capable of demonstrating an interest or training in boxing or automotive repair as anyone else. Simply being a doctor shouldn't limit a person to a narrow skill set. Then why hasn't gaming adopted this approach. Why can't a cleric also possess psychic abilities? or master sword play? The restrictions of class are not natural and the rules govening them are riddled with exceptions and exemptions. The real question we asked is, "Why have a rule if it has to be followed by an exception?"

The next component requiring attention was the development of the horror aspect. Many horror games rely upon either Sanity or Fear points. The decision to create a Mental Points solved several problems. It offered a secondary health pool which physically weak creatures could cause harm without making them laughable when on the battlefield. It also opened the door to develop as series of Status Effects uniquely tailored to the horror genre.

When class restrictions were lifted and horror aspects became part of the basic game mechanic, real game development began. Weapons, skills, and abilities were developed regardless of genre. The unexpected shift allowed for the creation of a system adaptable to a wide range of time periods and settings. 

Test groups have played the system in pure fantasy settings allowing for basic weapons and magic, in pure science fiction settings allowing all weapons and psychic abilities, and in hybrid scenarios in which all things are fair game.

Players were amazed to discover new characters do not have to be rolled when transitioning from one scenario to the next. GMs don't have to announce, "Today we're playing in a horror setting" or "Get ready for a fantasy encounter". The shift in genre is subtle and may easily become part of the overall storyline. The adapability of the system to genre shifts also enables GMs whom grow tired of pure fantasy scenarios to shake things up a bit and never really lose their initial story line. 

As you can see, we're quite proud of the Tortured Earth gaming system. We hope you find it as entertaining to play as we've found to create. 

K. B. Kidder